# Exercise #1

## Source Text

**Driverless Cars Are Coming**

Can you imagine a time in the future when no one buys cars because no one needs them anymore? Google cofounder Sergey Brin can. He envisions a future with a public transportation system where fleets of driverless cars form a public-transport taxi system. The cars he foresees would use half the fuel of today's taxis and offer far more flexibility than a bus. He believes such cars would fundamentally change the world.

Television and movies have long been fascinated with cars that could drive themselves. In reality, Google has had cars that could drive independently under specific conditions since 2009. Their cars have driven more than half a million miles without a crash, but so far, Google cars aren't truly driverless; they still alert the driver to take over when pulling in and out of driveways or dealing with complicated traffic issues, such as navigating through roadwork or accidents. So what roadblocks lie ahead for the autonomous car?

Sensing the World

Let's begin by looking at which companies are making computer-driven cars. Originally, many futurists believed the key to developing self-driving cars someday wasn't so much smarter cars as smarter roads. For example, in the late 1950s, General Motors created a concept car that could run on a special test track. The track was embedded with an electrical cable that sent radio signals to a receiver on the front end of the car. Engineers at Berkeley tried something similar, but they used magnets with alternating polarity. The car read the positive and negative polarity as messages in binary code. These smart-road systems worked surprisingly well, but they required massive upgrades to existing roads, something that was simply too expensive to be practical.

Without the option of smarter roads, manufacturers turned to smarter cars—but how much smarter did the cars need to be? For starters, they needed a whole lot of sensors. Google's modified Toyota Prius uses position-estimating sensors on the left rear wheel, a rotating sensor on the roof, a video camera mounted near the rearview mirror, four automotive radar sensors, a GPS receiver, and an inertial motion sensor. The most important bit of technology in this system is the spinning sensor on the roof. Dubbed LIDAR, it uses laser beams to form a constantly updating 3-D model of the car's surroundings. The combination of all this input is necessary for the driverless car to mimic the skill of a human at the wheel.

Sensors are nothing new, of course. In the 1980s, automakers used speed sensors at the wheels in the creation of antilock brakes. Within 10 years, those sensors had become more advanced to detect and respond to the danger of out-of-control skids or rollovers. The information from the sensors can cause the car to apply brakes on individual wheels and reduce power from the engine, allowing far better response and control than a human driver could manage alone. Further improvements in sensors and computer hardware and software to make driving safer are also leading to cars that can handle more and more driving tasks on their own.

Driving or Assisting?

Antilock brakes and driver assistance still seem a long way from the dream of calling a driverless cab to take us wherever we desire, but Sebastian Thrun, founder of the Google Car project, believes that the technology has finally begun to catch up to the dream. "There was no way, before 2000, to make something interesting. The sensors weren't there, the computers weren't there, and the mapping wasn't there. Radar was a device on a hilltop that cost two hundred million dollars. It wasn't something you could buy at Radio Shack." So just how driverless will the cars be in the near future?

In 2013, BMW announced the development of "Traffic Jam Assistant." The car can handle driving functions at speeds up to 25 mph, but special touch sensors make sure the driver keeps hold of the wheel. In fact, none of the cars developed so far are completely driverless. They can steer, accelerate, and brake themselves, but all are designed to notify the driver when the road ahead requires human skills, such as navigating through work zones and around accidents. This means the human driver must remain alert and be ready to take over when the situation requires. This necessitates the car being ready to quickly get the driver's attention whenever a problem occurs. GM has developed driver's seats that vibrate when the vehicle is in danger of backing into an object. The Google car simply announces when the driver should be prepared to take over. Other options under consideration are flashing lights on the windshield and other heads-up displays. Manufacturers are also considering using cameras to watch that drivers are remaining focused on the road. While the driver watches the road, the car watches the driver.

Why would anyone want a driverless car that still needs a driver? Wouldn't drivers get bored waiting for their turn to drive? "The psychological aspects of automation are really a challenge," admits Dr. Werner Huber, a BMW project manager driver. "We have to interpret the driving fun in a new way." Some manufacturers hope to do that by bringing in-car entertainment and information systems that use heads-up displays. Such displays can be turned off instantly when the driver needs to take over—something not available to drivers trying to text with a cell phone. In this way, the in-car system is actually a safety feature, and safety is a big concern.

Waiting on the Law

Most driving laws focus on keeping drivers, passengers, and pedestrians safe, and lawmakers know that safety is best achieved with alert drivers. Presently, traffic laws are written with the assumption that the only safe car has a human driver in control at all times. As a result, in most states it is illegal even to test computer-driven cars. California, Nevada, Florida, and the District of Columbia have led the country in allowing limited use of semi-autonomous cars; manufacturers believe that more states will follow as soon as the cars are proved more reliably safe. Still, even if traffic laws change, new laws will be needed in order to cover liability in the case of an accident. If the technology fails and someone is injured, who is at fault—the driver or the manufacturer?

Automakers are continuing their work on the assumption that the problems ahead will be solved. Tesla has projected a 2016 release for a car capable of driving on autopilot 90 percent of the time. Mercedes-Benz, Audi, and Nissan plan to have cars that can drive themselves by 2020. The road to the truly autonomous car stretches on ahead of us, but we grow closer to the destination every day.


## Assignment
In the article "Driverless Cars are Coming," the author presents both positive and negative aspects of driverless cars. Using details from the article, create an argument for or against the development of these cars. Be sure to include:
- your position on driverless cars
- appropriate details from the article that support your position
- an introduction, a body, and a conclusion to your argumentative essay

## Holistic Rating for Source-Based Writing
After reading each essay and completing the analytical rating form, assign a holistic score based on the rubric below. For the following evaluations you will need to use a grading scale between 1 (minimum) and 6 (maximum). As with the analytical rating form, the distance between each grade (e.g., 1-2, 3-4, 4-5) should be considered equal.

**SCORE OF 6:** An essay in this category demonstrates clear and consistent mastery, although it may have a few minor errors. A typical essay effectively and insightfully develops a point of view on the issue and demonstrates outstanding critical thinking; the essay uses clearly appropriate examples, reasons, and other evidence taken from the source text(s) to support its position; the essay is well organized and clearly focused, demonstrating clear coherence and smooth progression of ideas; the essay exhibits skillful use of language, using a varied, accurate, and apt vocabulary and demonstrates meaningful variety in sentence structure; the essay is free of most errors in grammar, usage, and mechanics.

**SCORE OF 5:** An essay in this category demonstrates reasonably consistent mastery, although it will have occasional errors or lapses in quality. A typical essay effectively develops a point of view on the issue and demonstrates strong critical thinking; the essay generally using appropriate examples, reasons, and other evidence taken from the source text(s) to support its position; the essay is well organized and focused, demonstrating coherence and progression of ideas; the essay exhibits facility in the use of language, using appropriate vocabulary demonstrates variety in sentence structure; the essay is generally free of most errors in grammar, usage, and mechanics.

**SCORE OF 4:** An essay in this category demonstrates adequate mastery, although it will have lapses in quality. A typical essay develops a point of view on the issue and demonstrates competent critical thinking; the essay using adequate examples, reasons, and other evidence taken from the source text(s) to support its position; the essay is generally organized and focused, demonstrating some coherence and progression of ideas exhibits adequate; the essay may demonstrate inconsistent facility in the use of language, using generally appropriate vocabulary demonstrates some variety in sentence structure; the essay may have some errors in grammar, usage, and mechanics.

**SCORE OF 3:** An essay in this category demonstrates developing mastery, and is marked by ONE OR MORE of the following weaknesses: develops a point of view on the issue, demonstrating some critical thinking, but may do so inconsistently or use inadequate examples, reasons, or other evidence taken from the source texts to support its position; the essay is limited in its organization or focus, or may demonstrate some lapses in coherence or progression of ideas displays; the essay may demonstrate facility in the use of language, but sometimes uses weak vocabulary or inappropriate word choice and/or lacks variety or demonstrates problems in sentence structure; the essay may contain an accumulation of errors in grammar, usage, and mechanics.

**SCORE OF 2:** An essay in this category demonstrates little mastery, and is flawed by ONE OR MORE of the following weaknesses: develops a point of view on the issue that is vague or seriously limited, and demonstrates weak critical thinking; the essay provides inappropriate or insufficient examples, reasons, or other evidence taken from the source text to support its position; the essay is poorly organized and/or focused, or demonstrates serious problems with coherence or progression of ideas; the essay displays very little facility in the use of language, using very limited vocabulary or incorrect word choice and/or demonstrates frequent problems in sentence structure; the essay contains errors in grammar, usage, and mechanics so serious that meaning is somewhat obscured.

**SCORE OF 1:** An essay in this category demonstrates very little or no mastery, and is severely flawed by ONE OR MORE of the following weaknesses: develops no viable point of view on the issue, or provides little or no evidence to support its position; the essay is disorganized or unfocused, resulting in a disjointed or incoherent essay; the essay displays fundamental errors in vocabulary and/or demonstrates severe flaws in sentence structure; the essay contains pervasive errors in grammar, usage, or mechanics that persistently interfere with meaning.