# Exercise #4

## Source Text
**Unmasking the Face on Mars**
Side by side: a Viking 1 photo from 1975, a Mars Global Surveyor (MGS) image from 1998, and the latest MGS image from 2001.
New high-resolution images and 3D altimetry from NASA's Mars Global Surveyor spacecraft reveal the Face on Mars for what it really is: a mesa.
On May 24, 2001—Twenty five years ago, something funny happened around Mars. NASA's Viking 1 spacecraft was circling the planet, snapping photos of possible landing sites for its sister ship Viking 2, when it spotted the shadowy likeness of a human face. An enormous head nearly two miles from end to end seemed to be staring back at the cameras from a region of the Red Planet called Cydonia.
There must have been a degree of surprise among mission controllers back at the Jet Propulsion Laboratory when the face appeared on their monitors. But the sensation was short-lived. Scientists figured it was just another Martian mesa, common enough around Cydonia, only this one had unusual shadows that made it look like an Egyptian Pharaoh. 
A few days later NASA unveiled the image for all to see. The caption noted a "huge rock formation . . . which resembles a human head . . . formed by shadows giving the illusion of eyes, nose, and mouth." The authors reasoned it would be a good way to engage the public and attract attention to Mars.
It certainly did!
The "Face on Mars" has since become a pop icon. It has starred in a Hollywood film, appeared in books, magazines, radio talk shows – even haunted grocery store checkout lines for 25 years! Some people think the Face is bona fide evidence of life on Mars – evidence that NASA would rather hide, say conspiracy theorists. Meanwhile, defenders of the NASA budget wish there was an ancient civilization on Mars. 
A 1976 Viking 1 photograph of the Face on Mars
Although few scientists believed the Face was an alien artifact, photographing Cydonia became a priority for NASA when Mars Global Surveyor (MGS) arrived at the Red Planet in Sept. 1997, eighteen long years after the Viking missions ended. "We felt this was important to taxpayers," explained Jim Garvin, chief scientist for NASA's mars Exploration Program. "We photographed the Face as soon as we could get a good shot at it."
And so on April 5, 1998, when Mars Global Surveyor flew over Cydonia for the first time, Michael Malin and his Mars Orbiter Camera (MOC) team snapped a picture ten times sharper than the original Viking photos. Thousands of anxious web surfers were waiting when the image first appeared on a JPL web site, revealing . . . a natural landform. There was no alien monument after all. 
But not everyone was satisfied. The Face on Mars is located at 41 degrees north martial latitude where it was winter in April '98 – a cloudy time of year on the Red Planet. The camera on board MGS had to peer through wispy clouds to see the Face. Perhaps, said skeptics, alien markings were hidden by haze. 
Mission controllers prepared to look again. "It's not easy to target Cydonia," says Garvin. "In fact, it's hard work." Mars Global Surveyor is a mapping spacecraft that normally looks straight down and scans the planet like a fax machine in narrow 2.5 km-wide strips. "We don't pass over the Face very often," he noted. 
Nevertheless, on April 8, 2001 – a cloudless summer day in Cydonia – Mars Global Surveyor drew close enough for a second look. "We had to roll the spacecraft 25 degrees to center the Face in the field of view," said Garvin. "Malin's team captured an extraordinary photo using the camera's absolute maximum resolution." Each pixel in the 2001 image spans 1.56 meters, compared to the 43 meters per pixel in the best 1976 Viking photo. 
"As a rule of thumb, you can discern things in a digital image 3 times bigger than the pixel size," he added. "So, if there were objects in this picture like airplanes on the ground or Egyptian-style pyramids or even small shacks, you could see what they were!"
What the picture actually shows is the Martian equivalent of a butte or mesa – landforms common around the American West. "It reminds me of most of Middle Butte in the Snake River Plain of Idaho," says Garvin. "That's a lava dome that takes the form of an isolated mesa about the same height as the Face on Mars."

## Assignment
You have read the article 'Unmasking the Face on Mars.' Imagine you are a scientist at NASA discussing the Face with someone who thinks it was created by aliens. Using information in the article, write an argumentative essay to convince someone that the Face is just a natural landform. Be sure to include: claims to support your argument that the Face is a natural landform; evidence from the article to support your claims; an introduction, a body, and a conclusion to your argumentative essay.

## Holistic Rating for Source-Based Writing
After reading each essay and completing the analytical rating form, assign a holistic score based on the rubric below. For the following evaluations you will need to use a grading scale between 1 (minimum) and 6 (maximum). As with the analytical rating form, the distance between each grade (e.g., 1-2, 3-4, 4-5) should be considered equal.

**SCORE OF 6:** An essay in this category demonstrates clear and consistent mastery, although it may have a few minor errors. A typical essay effectively and insightfully develops a point of view on the issue and demonstrates outstanding critical thinking; the essay uses clearly appropriate examples, reasons, and other evidence taken from the source text(s) to support its position; the essay is well organized and clearly focused, demonstrating clear coherence and smooth progression of ideas; the essay exhibits skillful use of language, using a varied, accurate, and apt vocabulary and demonstrates meaningful variety in sentence structure; the essay is free of most errors in grammar, usage, and mechanics.

**SCORE OF 5:** An essay in this category demonstrates reasonably consistent mastery, although it will have occasional errors or lapses in quality. A typical essay effectively develops a point of view on the issue and demonstrates strong critical thinking; the essay generally using appropriate examples, reasons, and other evidence taken from the source text(s) to support its position; the essay is well organized and focused, demonstrating coherence and progression of ideas; the essay exhibits facility in the use of language, using appropriate vocabulary demonstrates variety in sentence structure; the essay is generally free of most errors in grammar, usage, and mechanics.

**SCORE OF 4:** An essay in this category demonstrates adequate mastery, although it will have lapses in quality. A typical essay develops a point of view on the issue and demonstrates competent critical thinking; the essay using adequate examples, reasons, and other evidence taken from the source text(s) to support its position; the essay is generally organized and focused, demonstrating some coherence and progression of ideas exhibits adequate; the essay may demonstrate inconsistent facility in the use of language, using generally appropriate vocabulary demonstrates some variety in sentence structure; the essay may have some errors in grammar, usage, and mechanics.

**SCORE OF 3:** An essay in this category demonstrates developing mastery, and is marked by ONE OR MORE of the following weaknesses: develops a point of view on the issue, demonstrating some critical thinking, but may do so inconsistently or use inadequate examples, reasons, or other evidence taken from the source texts to support its position; the essay is limited in its organization or focus, or may demonstrate some lapses in coherence or progression of ideas displays; the essay may demonstrate facility in the use of language, but sometimes uses weak vocabulary or inappropriate word choice and/or lacks variety or demonstrates problems in sentence structure; the essay may contain an accumulation of errors in grammar, usage, and mechanics.

**SCORE OF 2:** An essay in this category demonstrates little mastery, and is flawed by ONE OR MORE of the following weaknesses: develops a point of view on the issue that is vague or seriously limited, and demonstrates weak critical thinking; the essay provides inappropriate or insufficient examples, reasons, or other evidence taken from the source text to support its position; the essay is poorly organized and/or focused, or demonstrates serious problems with coherence or progression of ideas; the essay displays very little facility in the use of language, using very limited vocabulary or incorrect word choice and/or demonstrates frequent problems in sentence structure; the essay contains errors in grammar, usage, and mechanics so serious that meaning is somewhat obscured.

**SCORE OF 1:** An essay in this category demonstrates very little or no mastery, and is severely flawed by ONE OR MORE of the following weaknesses: develops no viable point of view on the issue, or provides little or no evidence to support its position; the essay is disorganized or unfocused, resulting in a disjointed or incoherent essay; the essay displays fundamental errors in vocabulary and/or demonstrates severe flaws in sentence structure; the essay contains pervasive errors in grammar, usage, or mechanics that persistently interfere with meaning. 